In August:

I arrived in Beijing to see my extended family (two grandparents, one uncle, one aunt, and one cousin), all of whom I had neglected to come visit for a long time. When explaining the trip to friends, I wasn't really sure what to say except that it was in order "to say goodbye" to my grandparents who were objectively speaking very old although not in any critical situation. For the past week or two I had been, for other reasons, digging deep into a personal acceptance of loss, and I think the weight of everything else at the then present made this death knell ancestral pilgrimage prodigal son situation feel a lot lighter. My father greeted me at the airport and listened to me complain for a minute before he paused and interrupted me. Earlier in the day my grandfather, ailing for some time and subsisting on meals blended together into a slop, had passed away. It had been a long time since I last saw him. The shuttle bus from the airport arrived and we sat down with what I assumed was a mother and her teenage son. Trying not to perturb them as we drove slowly, disastrously, almost silently and under the extremely bright lights that had not been switched off, while making the smallest sound and movements possible, I wished I could have said goodbye.

That would, I think, be a fair enough ending for my side of things, I don't know how much the rest is deserving of being said, but I feel that I have to continue writing if only because there is nothing else to do. I think immediately something in me was unlocked and out of simple desperation chose this awful, debasing practice to contain itself. We lived so far apart and interacted so infrequently that when I think of him it is a picture formed from a slow drawing together of objects. One of his paintings that hung in my childhood home—a mountain temple or something; I don't remember exactly. It provided enough reassurance that studying art was a "real possibility." I've kept some of his drawings with me throughout the years too, including these cartoon animals drawn in marker on scraps of thick paper like the backs of recycled packaging. I find them garish, bright and childlike, putting them on display and then hiding them in a drawer again. There's a stone stamp—an artist's seal chiseled with his name—and a yellowed sketchbook. Tattooed on myself is more of his art and a copy of our last name traced from the soapstone engraving. I don't know that he would have appreciated this. I never told him.

At some point between then and now, it struck me that I've never had to say any one of my grandparents' names out loud except once at the pharmacy maybe, and prior to the funeral ceremony beginning I had even forgotten what my grandfather's name was before someone had said it in passing, perfunctorily and without emotion I remember, asking I think some logistical question pertaining to the location or time of service, something banal like that, although in the moment it very clearly illuminated the fact, as clear as a written sentence, that I had forgotten his name. It seemed a thing so utterly inexcusable and horrible (who had I been crying for) that I've pretended since then that this moment of realization never occurred. Being unable to read it and basically not having any specific use for it as he was always referred to as "grandfather" by every member of the family I suppose are the two decidedly untenable reasons I did not know.

We didn't talk much if at all, even in person. There were great tracts of silence, years of silence possibly. Somehow I think the few words spoken between us were enough. I hope he felt the same way. That one understood the other without needing to speak; that it seems a statistic likelihood two taciturn people would require fewer words to feel connected. I remember that if it were only family present, he would barely say anything. But if he were teaching, lecturing, or doing anything that behooved him to address everyone (as once, at a gathering on his birthday), then he would launch into a long speech replete with emphatic hand waving and proverbial advice, the meaning of which would have be distilled and translated for me afterwards. I think I developed a sense during his later years that he had a lot on his mind, as if he were a troubled king sitting alone on a throne. This image of him was reinforced by my inability to understand the complexity of what he said when he felt it was truly important to speak. All of the words spoken by the rest of my family to the point of having lost all meaning, like take care of your health; find a wife;

## It's part of the family mythos that his dream to become an artist was derailed somewhat by the Cultural Revolution, and despite the . On mornings he would practice calligraphy in the park, writing with water on the stone ground before leaving it to disappear with the heat of the day.

Today is my grandmother's birthday. As is normal here, I'm told that we've decided to not tell her what happened. To spare her the grief that her husband passed away yesterday. She is also bedridden, fragile, and any further pain would be too much for anyone to bear. The perverted logic is explained to me and with it comes a warning to not say anything, abducting me into this conspiratorial kindness, some sordid bedtime story ballasted by secrets, an allegory of hope with its hidden double meaning. Apparently, today or yesterday, she asked why he hadn't come to visit her bedside and somebody, I don't know who, was responsible for lying and telling her that they had brought him to the hospital. I wonder what worse things than this moment of pure abjection, already in one's deathbed and made unaware of yet another fatal truth, have been omitted from the circulating story for my sake. I go back to the conversations that preluded the end of my relationship, which concluded gracelessly just as I left for China, and I wonder if this decision to not speak has infected me too, if I'm unable to speak aloud the most essential things in order to keep things as they are, even if these things have decayed, a blind need for preservation, which is otherwise called fear. renewing source of which of there is a remainder a thread can be drawn back around to the start

Lying infirm unable to move. Until yesterday, I hadn't written a single word for five years. I abandoned writing because I told myself that the only way I would be able to build a life around it is if it were absolutely necessary for me to write. Without that compulsion or fundamental need, I didn't think it would be possible. I'm returning to it now, for the moment, since I have no other way to express what is happening.

My father, crying, said he thinks my grandfather knew he was going to die. This sentiment is echoed later after the funeral. He refused to stay at the hospital, tearing out his IVs and insisting on returning home. For anyone that knew him, it's clear that this wasn't any kind of temporary psychosis. He could still think clearly. He knew what was happening. He wanted to be at home. Clarity what is revealed in desperation.

---

Has it really been ten years since I've been back? Now there are self-driving cars on the street. The bonds and people I thought I would return to are no longer there. My uncle looks old and my grandmother is barely recognizable to me. As I write this I sense that my shock and grief are not mine to claim. I'm having difficulty naming them as anything other than unjustified. I chose not to be here, to not witness the passing of time. I did not attend to what my cousin called the "should," chose not to see the daily deterioration, did not shoulder the suffering protracted and multiplied by daily drudgery. I came to say goodbye but I had not, in unalterable fact, done so. And I wonder how is it that I am allowed to partake in this grief, having arrived only at the last moment to say that I cared too. That there was no joy on my grandmother's face.

How is it that I can still eat, sleep, and write? Should I be grateful that the past days have not voided the ability to act human, act normally, smile, joke, and laugh? I did not wish my grandfather a safe and peaceful journey as we looked at his body shrouded in silk; instead I asked for forgiveness. Was it him lying, still, in front of us in the casket? I had not seen him the day before, or the day before that. I had not seen him for years until then, that moment, eyes closed in some pained sleep. Hand twisted plasticine emerging. Then, we watched him or his corpse descend into the furnace before the steel maw closed like a guillotine.

What came out were bones bleached of flesh. Where were his clothes, the flower petals, and his baseball cap. Did they undress him while we waited in the hall. Should we shave his beard and mustache, no he always left his face like that. Impossibly white and the ends still smoldering, burning a bright orange still from the intense heat. Can bone burn or was it flesh and marrow is this how bodies are disposed of. The first piece that the attendant grabbed with the metal tongs was a large bone still intact, maybe it was the femur. It seemed too large to have come from the waxen shriveled corpse. Should not the rest of the pile also have looked like that. Where was the other corresponding one in the ash and broken remains? Or was it that this piece had survived somehow the inferno. Had they already removed the skeletal, identifiable pieces before we had entered the room--the skull, ribs, pelvis--and by accident forgotten to remove this offensive remain?

“My visitor’s features seemed flattened out, melted, as it were, as if the hand of time had passed brutally back and forth over a mask of softened wax; what I had consented, for a moment, to take for beauty had never been more than a fragile flower of youth.” Page 65\.

“And it is here, in that interval between the disembarkation of the invalid and the moment of his death, that occurs one of those series of events which will forever be impossible for me to reconstruct, and upon which nevertheless my destiny has been built.” Page 90\.

One pan was filled and brought over to the workstation. A large steel wedge painted red was used to pulverize the bone. Most of what lay on the slab was being vacuumed up in a translucent tube behind us. My cousin and I kept turning back to watch the pieces slowly disappear. I watched as an orange flash ignited, traveled up the hose, and was sucked up with the rest of it into a hole in the tiled wall. The wedge rocked back and forth, compressing the bone, which shattered in the pan on the table in the room. A soft and sickening crunch was heard and a pale cloud billowed out from the steel tray. I didn't know if it was dust, ash, or smoke. Some shards were still alight.

There is a QR code on the coffin. There is also a QR code on the locker in the kind of makeshift mausoleum in which his remains are locked away by the attendant. He looked around and pondered which number would be fitting. There are not many 8's left. How about something with a 9 and 5, he said while looking through the aisles. We are standing there confused at the open-ended nature of this final ceremony, his lot not having been arranged somehow beforehand, the service having heretofore been strictly orchestrated, a series of instructions to line up by genetic inheritance, bow three times, face this way, bow again, cry. Row 9 column 5, since he was 95\. My uncle seemed happy at this suggestion. The attendant grabbed a towel to dust off the small stainless steel compartment. We can store him here for up to three years, he said.

That is enough time. For when my grandmother passes too their remains will be brought back to their hometown and properly buried. I can't fathom having to do this again. To fly back. To take the arduous trip to the countryside. But I see that nobody can. Despite their chatter, their reminiscence, their meticulous plan making, I see that nobody is willing. You can't burn the clothes here. You can only burn paper and flowers.

This only makes sense to me as a story in which the events are already decided and need only to be described. We carefully undo the safety pin and remove the black armbands when we arrive back at the house so that my grandmother doesn't see. My cousin puts a colored shirt on. This morning as we prepared unbeknownst to her for the funeral that commenced around noon she said something to my aunt, which circulated through the family now having banded together as a makeshift committee tasked with the officiary delegation, pertaining to my grandparents, of what to do without them being made fully aware of the proceedings pertaining to their death, uttering words that I found I could not translate when having to transcribe them because of the fact that I have only ever heard and understood them in a conversational context, never having needed to rearticulate their meaning in a different language, so I search online. "I can't do it anymore." Pausing over the trash can, my uncle is about to throw his armband away when he hesitates and says maybe it's better to keep it instead. My cousin and his wife choose plants from the garden for their new home. We order pizza. A large tome that contains the family tree is brought up from the basement. I think Deng Xiao Ping is in there. No, they changed it. There is my name, next to my father's, next to my grandfather's. I am the 25th generation. The front few pages are covered in my grandfather's calligraphy. Something about our family. I can't understand. I listen as they talk about my grandfather's life. There is never a moment of silence.

It's hard to understand what my grandmother is saying. She only says a few words before returning to rest. We celebrated your birthday yesterday my aunt says. My grandmother says something that sounds like goodbye. I hold her hand for a few seconds before we leave.

I'm happy that my cousin is married. It means that the thin line on which our given names are written will probably continue on when the next edition of the family tree is published, a self-loathing for the relief I feel at not having to shoulder that particular responsibility. In the hotel room, I look in the mirror and tell myself that I can hold all of this grief. I tell myself that there is no end to it and no end to the amount that can be stored inside of me. I ask for more, all of it to contain. I have endless tears it seems. For the collapse of my relationship. The death of my grandfather. The contorted faces of my family. “I was discovering myself to be inexorable.” Page 70\.

I wonder if I'm supposed to stay here with none of my belongings, no place to call home, nothing to say or do. These people with whom I'm supposed to share an intense closeness and yet I find myself struggling to get to know, ask, embed myself between. My aunt says that my grandmother could go tomorrow or in a few months. I could have come on any day in the past ten years and I would have been able to say goodbye. She holds my arm and says it's sad, you were just one day late to see your grandfather. I'm still waiting to feel the enormity of that guilt. I expect it to arrive when I'm not ready, in a defenseless moment without preparation. Instead I feel guilty that I awake before dawn to violently resurfacing memories of my relationship, those fleeting memories more arresting than this horror in front of me.

The insidious should. I keep returning to what I should have done or said. And what I should be feeling now. I should in fact feel worse than I do--I'm unable to understand the words delivered by the funerary official. I'm unable to understand the speech given by my grandfather captured on a cell phone. The only word I can understand is him saying the word happiness. I don't know what I should do except write. When I stand up I start to pace. When I lie down I lie motionless.  
I'm ashamed almost at how easily the words come when it is too late--after the fact, when they are no longer needed. I have a thrilling need to make public my grief. If I stop writing then it returns to having no use.

Grandfather's hand twisted plasticine. The dark leaf of the chrysanthemum. I try to surreptitiously wipe the drops of sweat off my face to make sure nobody else is saddened by my perceived sadness. When I look down there is a bottle of water in my hand without thought throughout the day filling back up the vessel. I try not to choke when I cry, muffle the sigh, I step outside in order to blow my nose. I should comfort those around me, but I don't. I don't know what to say. I brought with me two small canvases to make cards from. It took almost an entire day to arrive and I hadn't made a mark on either of them.

“Of motion: “Now I see it, it is time, and even: it is time’s writing, it is age. From the young head, the body goes forward, aging imperceptibly. Ah\! so that’s what was gripping my heart.”

My grandmother groans and says she won't make it this time, the time being a spell of illness, so clearly discernible by the state of being bedridden or not, whether one can excise themselves from the place where they are meant to be in order to get better. It strikes me that unwellness is not a temporary condition. That what we consider convalescence, the process, however torturous it may be, of obtaining betterment is just a moving around, back and forth, edemic fluid massaged from the cavity, osmotically reabsorbed returning again to where it had settled before. Unable to sleep, I jerk awake on the plane and then awake, I lose myself in recollection until by accident I remember something unbearable and jerk again, but this time fully awake, an instant involuntary reaction, I wonder if my neighbors are disturbed, have noticed at all the strange shuddering, paroxysm of man going home.

I schedule multiple doctor's appointments when I finally arrive back to my apartment. Not out of fear or worry, but
